---
title: "Artful code"
date: 2019-09-30T09:00:00Z
draft: false
author: aloysius
image: images/guest.jpg
description: "30 September 2019, opinion piece"
---

...or how I stopped worrying about getting it perfect and started to love PEP8

> A guest blog by Arturas Eidukas (@finnkauski)



Hi DaSHers, in lieu of last week's newsletter we have a guest blog from my good
friend Art Eidukas. All words are his own, so please enjoy. Please note that
just because it is not a typical Fishman post does not mean there are any fewer
popular culture references!


> If you get yourself into PEP8ing mode, what do you tend to see? You tend to
> see the PEP8 stuff and not what really matters.

- **Raymond Hettinger, 2015**


## Motivation

Well, firstly, I am by no means a python export. I am by no means a python
expert, but I have been using `python` since September 2015 (almost 4 years at
the time of writing). In that time I've seen numerous codebases written by
people of varying ability and experience. I have also worked in a development
area which had a hard task of building infrastructure for a massive
organization.

As you use the language and hit your head into problem after problem, messy
codebase after messy codebase you start to wonder if there is some form of best
practice in writing consistent, clean and readible code.

Some of you probably have been in a position of looking back a codebase you
wrote a while back and recoiling how untidy it is and how now you would `write
it in a much nicer way`. And to avoid this situation in the future, you might
have even jumped to your favourite search engine and tried looking for some
community guided standards. If you live in python-land you'll inevitably
stumble upon **PEP8**.

From here, you may go choose to go down one of two extreme routes:

1. **The Great Dictator**

   One of those people who are so militant about following this standard, that
   the ideology takes priority and it can impede long-term productivity. These
   people begin to demand more and more time allocated to nitpicking the
   smallest of issues never actually seeing the larger code issues that can
   hide within.

2. **The Dude/Dudette**

   Loves bowling, being a slacker. Hates having to do commenting, documenting code
   and sure as hell won't bother having nice versions control practices.
   Typically does what they want with a drink in their hand which might or might
   not contain a White Russian and when asked if they are aware of python coding
   standards they will just namedrop *PEP8*.

In my personal experience I've not met anyone on either of the two extremes.
Most people will end up between the two, even if nobody wants to admit that
they might be 1/5 dictator.

You should read PEP8, internalise what you think will help you be clean and
consistent within you codebase and then just move on. The coding standard
quagmire is a hard one to navigate and it is why this write up essentially exists.

I'm here to try to encourage you to be more pragmatic and critical about coding
standards and to brain dump my thoughts on clean code in python.
If you're reading this then I presume you're ready to dive in, but be warned,
this might fall under [Sturgeon's Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sturgeon%2527s_law)...


## Acknowledgements and Sources

I think the key takeaways from this post are inspired heavily by the following
talk:

[Raymond Hettinger - Beyond PEP 8 -- Best practices for beautiful intelligible code - PyCon 2015](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wf-BqAjZb8M)


Please go see it and show Raymond some love on various social media. Twitter is
where posts useful tips and tricks for python.


### Thoughts about PEP8

Ahh, Python Enhancement Proposal number 8, or PEP8 for short. Created on
05-Jul-2001 to help establish a consistent way of styling your code. However in
my experience, it has been misused to great extent. You see, the issue here is that
people want nice and tidy python code, but by evangelically following this
standard and not compromising with PEP8 they sometimes introduce other, more
glaring issues. Even **worse**, by reviewing other peoples code and focusing
purely on the compliance with PEP8, people miss what is known as _unpythonic_
code. In other words, code that can be made much tidier and clearer by
leveraging python specific language features.

Raymond Hettinger (python core developer) has a great talk about
PEP8 and how to write intelligible code. We will come back this talk throughout
our coverage of PEP8. But before moving on I'd like raise a point that he makes
early in the talk to set the scene:


> What you want is that the people who are struggling a little bit (with a
> coding problem) to overcome and deal with a problem and at some point become
> very effective. How can you prevent that outcome. Its easy! You give them some
> low hanging fruit, something to go do that seems productive but isn't. And one
> of those things is a certain PEP, located between 7 and 9.

Also, I will be omitting quite a few guidelines as I cover PEP8, for the sake of
simplifying this writeup. By cherry-picking which ones to present, I
will give a you fewer things to remember and more rule of thumb things to
follow. Consider this as me doing the hard work to suggest which are the most
important parts. You're welcome.

The one key message I want to get across before we proceed is that I do not
dislike PEP8. I think it's extremely useful, but I don't want people being
militant about following every bit of advice it gives without considering it for
their use case. Other than that I think everyone should read the PEP and
internalise what it tries to preach.

#### A note on Consistency

The first line of the PEP8 introduction states:

> This document gives conventions for the Python code comprising the standard
> library in the main Python distribution.


The key word there is `convention` which is defined in the Oxford English
dictionary as: *A way in which something is usually done*. The key word there
is *usually*. Consistency is important, but when consistency is not an option you
should use your best judgement. Know when to be inconsistent, comes with time and
experience so write code and get feedback.

As Mr. Hettinger says, a lot of people skip this part and jump further into
PEP8, but really this is a **key** message across PEP8, know which battles to
fight and know which sacrifices to make to ensure consistency with PEP8
across your code-base and your project.

See
[here](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#a-foolish-consistency-is-the-hobgoblin-of-little-minds)
for yourself for a few cases where sacrificing style guide consistency might be preferred.

### Code Layout

#### Indentation

> Use 4 spaces for indentation.

I firmly believe that using 4 spaced indents for your python code has a
significant impact on the readability of the code. Imagine having a piece of
code aligned as follows:

```{python}
def function(parameter):

  result = 0

  for i in parameter:
    if i > 10:
      result+=i
    else:
      continue

  return result
```

I don't know about you, but to me this seems a bit cramped. Refactoring your
code as follows adds a bit more space and lets the eye clearly align and
distinguish what level each line is at. And yes, I know you can get indentation
guides in your fancy editor, but that won't be there for you when u want to
quickly open this in Notepad or view it on GitHub.

```{python}
def function(parameter):

    result = 0

    for i in parameter:
        if i > 10:
            result+=i
        else:
            continue

    return result
```

Note that things like the if statement and the code for each outcome is quite
clearly indented and at least to my eye is easier to split out!

The Indentation chapter of PEP8 covers some more interesting choices for
indenting function parameters etc. If you are interested, you can read more
about it [here](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#code-lay-out).


#### Tabs or Spaces?

> Spaces


I think as tedious as it sounds, you should use spaces (ideally 4) for
indentation. I think to make it simpler, a lot of modern text editors that are
used in coding as well as full blown
[IDE](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwi1keyUr-niAhX_QxUIHR41DhUQFjACegQIEhAG&url=https%253A%252F%252Fen.wikipedia.org%252Fwiki%252FIntegrated_development_environment&usg=AOvVaw26G_hSQrwphgc0qRbOs_Ur)'s
will convert tabs into spaces for you if you ask them to if not by default.

The issue is that if you mix tabs and spaces (which might look the same to you,
but aren't really the same thing to python), you might get a **TabError** and that's
not something that you really want slowing you down when it is so easily
avoidable.


#### Maximum Line Length

> PEP8 says 79. I say 90-ish


Well, that's not really true as I stole this guideline from Mr. Hettingers talk.
He raises a great point (which admittedly is reflected in PEP8 once you read it
more carefully) that militantly observing 79 character guidelines is sometimes
isn't very sensible.

**Indentation in python is important**. So lets say we have a bit of code with a
 function and a few nested structures within the code. Something along the lines
 of:

```{python}
def useful_function_name(list_of_entries, ****kwargs):

    for list_of_subentries in list_of_entries:
        for subentry in list_of_subentries:
            if subentry not in some_global_list:
                print("{} is not in the global list".format(subentry))
            else:
                some_global_list.append(another_useful_function(subentry))

    return some_global_list
```

And perhaps you could say that this bit of code is not a realistic example, but
it serves to illustrate that by having descriptive variable and function names and
using 4 space indentation makes the 79 character limit approach ever so
quickly.

So where does this leave us. Well we could go away and make the names of the
functions and variables shorter, but we then sacrifice readability for some
arbitrary number of characters. But guess what? Nobody is going to force you
(although they could do it through (commit
hooks)[https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Hooks]) to be
consistent with that number, which gives you the space really to set your own
limits for your own team.

Modern monitors and resolutions are wide. We can spare a few more characters
nowadays! However the key here is to keep the lines not too long and more
importantly readable. So pick a sensible line length (something like 90
characters perhaps just to add some space for indentation) and stick to it!


#### Blank Lines

I don't really have much to say on this bit of the style guide. I think it lays
out some sensible rules, but I do want to highlight this line:

> Use blank lines in functions, sparingly, to indicate logical sections.

I think this is a really good piece of advice and if you take away something
from this PEP8 suggestion on blank lines, it should probably be that.


#### Imports

> - Imports are always put at the top of the file, just after any module comments and docstrings, and before module globals and constants
> - Wildcard imports (`from <module> import *`) should be avoided


Those 2 bits of advice I think are key, there are some other things you could
learn by reading that section, but those are really the key things to follow.
Imagine yourself opening a piece of code that someone else wrote. Now you scroll
through it without thinking, take a sip of coffee and start tackling the task of
understanding what it does. The first thing you want to know is what does it
depend on? What kind of packages do I need? Well if that person followed
sensible guidelines, you'd see it all in one place. Neat. On the other hand if
the imports are scattered everywhere, you need to do the good ol' CTR+F to
actually get what you want and even then it would involve tons of jumping around
through the file.

Imports at the top. Always.

Now the second bit of advice about imports with ** is actually quite important. I
won't even go into things like namespacing, but suffice it to say that when one
reads through a codebase and stumbles upon a function that seems to be coming
from nowhere, usually `*` is to blame. And even worse if someone used two or
more `*` imports... well then you're in for a good ol' search online through the
package documentation (if you're lucky and that exists).

#### Pet Peeves and other recommendations

The (pet peeves and other
recommendations)[https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#pet-peeves] sections
in PEP8 are quite sensible.

I would go check them out as they give you a better idea of the 'little things'
that you could do to make your code better.


### Comments

> Comments that contradict the code are worse than no comments. Always make a
> priority of keeping the comments up-to-date when the code changes!


Again, the section on comments is actually really good and has a ton of useful
content. However the highlighted bit there is really important. Keep your
comments [and (docstrings](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-docstrings/) and
any documentation) up to date!

Avoid inline comments that say what the code does explicitly. If your code looks
like this:

```{python}
vaidated_input = validate(some_text)
```

You don't need to comment it. It wastes your time, someone elses time
reading it, computers time, space, time, space-time...
Anyway, if you write your code in a tidy, descriptive way you won't need inline
comments that state what your code does. That said, a very sensible use-case for
an inline comment would be explaining why for example we do things. Like in that
case there we could say:

```{python}
validated_input = validate(some_text) # Validate input to avoid code injection
```


### Docstrings

This deserves its own writeup, but suffice it to say that there is a separate
[PEP](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0257) that covers how to style those.
My advice on this account is: **USE THEM**. Please go read about them, pick
sensible guidelines on how to write them and use them.

Future you and anyone who reads your code will thank you.

I kept writting this post and decided to jump back up to this section and add a
bit more emphasis on docstring. I think once you've written them once or twice
given a chosen standard (I use the
[numpy](https://sphinxcontrib-napoleon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example_numpy.html)
it will soon become almost second nature. And it will **ALWAYS** be easier to
write them after you've written the code that they relate to. Because (a) you
have all the things it needs and does fresh in your head and (b) its much harder
to not be complacent with missing documentation when you know that it is code
you've written 3 months ago and it will be a faff figuring out what it does.

Also a rule of thumb I tend to use (make your own judgement on this) is that my
functions have to do what they say on the name and be fairly simplistic
abstractions of things you do often. This simplicity leads to my docstrings being simple
and concise because the function has a clear purpose and it is clear on what it
takes in, what it returns and what it affects. So whenever I notice that my
docstrings become bogged down and complicated I stop and think if my function is
trying to do too much and if some of the functionality there could be abstracted
into its own little function. So long docstrings are a nice little marker to
check if your code can be simplified. But again, thats just me. Try thinking like that
for a bit and see if its useful over time. I'm not your boss.


### Naming conventions

There is a lot to talk about here. As the (Descriptive: Naming
Styles)[https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#descriptive-naming-styles]
section of PEP8 shows there are a lot of ways to name your functions, variables
etc. I personally use what is called snake case when I write in python meaning
that I link words in my function names with underscores like so:

```{python}
my_new_value = my_snake_case_function(old_value)
```

In python for the most part, that is the recommended way to name things like
variables and functions. In other languages, like `Rust`, you even get told off
by the compiler for not doing that. That said its not the end of the world to
use different conventions. I use CamelCase in Haskell for example as that is
loosely the standard in that language.

But even in python, you really have seperate conventions on what to name how.
Exception names, typing variables and class names make use of upper case and
capitalisation in python. And I think over time I realised that the naming
conventions for the various python objects actually sensible and readable.
The main reason that different types of objects have different styles is to make
it much easier, at a glance, to know something about what you are looking at. As
above, if you meet an object called `Guido` you know that it is a class of some
kind where `guido` would instead be a function.

So not much to add here, go read that section and internalise that.


### Programming Recommendations

Again, a great section. Well written, gives succinct and useful advice to people.
But more importantly it does a bit more than just tell you how to style your
ode. It tells you how to write more _pythonic_ code (which is really sort of
the point of PEP8 in a way).

It is not a tutorial on how to code in python, but it definitely introduces a
few concepts and how to use them in a sensible way to write more pythonic
looking and functioning code.

## The shifting sands of simple

What does it mean to be _pythonic_?

Let me give you two example functions:

```{python}
def example1():
    index = 0

    for color in ["yellow", "blue", "red"]:
        print(str(index) + " " + color)
        index = index + 1

# ------
def example2():
    for index, color in enumerate(["yellow", "blue", "red"]):
        print(f"{index + 1} {color}")

# ------ for fun :)
def example3():
    list(map(lambda tpl: print(f"{tpl[0]} {tpl[1]}"), enumerate(["yellow","blue","red"])))
```

Let's assume we don't care about efficiency in this function. We don't mind
because it does such a minor thing in the grand scheme of our codebase.
Under that assumption, both these functions will do the same job.

They should **not** fail or have different results unless people use old versions
of python, etc. But just by looking at them I can see which person has used python
more.

Now thats not to say that one is more right than another at this level, but
purely from the way they have written the piece of code its clear that
**example2** is leveraging a lot more of the python in-built tools than
**example1** (if something in there is new to you I hope you go and check it out).

`So what?` I can hear you say. Does that change much? Well as I am writing this
these two are equivilent to me, but the second one looks tidier as it leverages
things that are made to solve the required problems (like
[enumerate](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0279/)). This is what In my head
it all boils down to. Over time you learn more about python, its features and
what should feel `right` when it comes to code in python. And then you become
more pythonic which to me means you start leveraging all the tools the language
has to offer in their intended use cases.

But whatever stage you are at, be it python wiz-kid, or just beginning with the
language, try appreciating the perspective of others. Wiz kids, appreciate that
sometime writing things out for others with more clear instructions could help
the target audience and junior devs get their heads around it more clearly
(**example1** is much easier to wrap your head around for someone new to python).

And the newbies, that are just discovering python, accept that some thing written
by people who have been doing it for a while will look much more concise and
sometimes will involve features you don't know about. But don't take this
sitting down, take the time when you can to look at these cryptic functions and
features, understand what **specific use case** they are trying to address and
incorporate them in your codebase.

So to sort of pull this all together, if you know about python and already write
pythonic code, think of who is going to read it and give them time to learn the
features of python. And if you're the `example1` person, take the time when you
see something come up that you haven't seen before to do a quick search online
and see if you can learn more about the language itself.


## Solving things with dirty code

Now this is might be a contraversial section so I will keep it short. If you're
ever opening up a text file and want to get the last few lines or if you're just
opening a csv to save it to Excel, consider not worrying about code style at
all.

Hear me out. Learning how to write python code in a nice and tidy way takes
time. And if you're solving a one-off problem that will never see the light of
day and will sit in the depths of your `D:` drive, do it quick and simple. Dont
worry about variable names, line length, docstrings etc. Just do it and move on.

Over time as you write more and more public facing code you will internalise the
bits of PEP8 you need and the next time you do the csv to Excel conversion (because
you lost the code in the cold depths of your hard drive), you will likely just
write it in a nice and tidy way without even noticing.

It takes time.
