---
title: "Data science and the occult"
date: 2020-01-08T05:00:00Z
draft: false
author: aloysius
image: images/logo.jpg
description: "Clickbait commentary"
---

Disclaimer: This title is click-bait.

I have read very little data science content over the Christmas period. I will
use this break to write a commentary on the current state of play within in data
science.


I have long been fascinated by the occult, witchcraft and magic. Typically these
things will conjure up images of satanic rituals and summoning demons for
nefarious reasons. However, this is poor treatment of the truth of the matter.
That there are some unseen forces in this world which can be harnessed for good
as well as ill is a seductive idea. The idea of magic permeates society and all
cultures on Earth and has become a staple of literature and cinema. Arthur C.
Clarke famously remarked,

> Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.


So far, so what? I am going to do my best to avoid this becoming a discussion of
techno-paganism or mentioning Wiccapedia and relate the ideas back to data
science.

The data science spheres are filled with many technically adept souls with
strong degrees and doctorates in mathematics, linguistics, physics and other
sciences. However, it was not all that long ago that science and the occult were
more closely intertwined than they are today.

Sir Isaac Newton, who amassed a large library of magic, assumed that the 'action
at a distance' he observed in gravity was in some way magical. He was also
fascinated by alchemy, without which modern chemistry and biology would not be
as advanced as they are.

On the other side of our comparison, "data science" (whatever that may mean) is
being used to turn large amounts of data into a business advantage, influence
over voters or big business utilising models of the hidden workings of society.
Facebook and Google work behind the scenes to take advantage of behaviours we
don't know we have. China's government use social scoring and facial recognition
to influence citizen behaviours. Faith is placed into inexplicable and unseen
forces which guide them, whether the inner workings are understood or not. This
is akin to digital alchemy.

Tarot readings may make you picture carnival psychics in tents making
predictions of your future. This is also far from the truth. The Hermetic Order
of the Golden Dawn, a secret society devoted to studying the occult and
metaphysics, say

> The most powerful sources of information come from within;
> the Tarot aids in coming in contact with one's Higher Self.

Tarot allows you to better understand yourself and use that self to
answer questions. How does this truly differ from a computer claiming itself to
be an expert and giving you its best guess? The Golden Dawn counted among its
members Aleister Crowley, Bram Stoker and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, but sadly
closed its doors in 1903. It is a shame there was no internet at the time to
claim it ["the first occultic winter"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AI_winter).

Algorithms are steadily becoming more [in control of our everyday
lives](https://www.vox.com/technology/2018/10/1/17882340/how-algorithms-control-your-life-hannah-fry).
We put our trust in a force we cannot explain to understand ourselves and each
other.  Decisions are made whether an applicant has the correct face for
the job, how much credit they should be allowed and whether or not they are
guilty of a crime. There are good and bad examples of where ML has been applied,
and you can check the our regular posts for a lot of examples. Some things are
just too complex for mathematical modelling or create the need for [ethical
guidelines](https://standards.ieee.org/content/dam/ieee-standards/standards/web/documents/other/ead_v1.pdf).


The scientist in me needs this remedied. For rigour to move data science out of
the realms of mysticism and astrology, but in places where needs to be. There
is still quite a bit of the child in me. The child loves stage magic and has
not yet suspended belief in the unknown. He loves the idea that magic and the
occult now underpins lots of what governments and businesses are making
decisions based upon. There are blogs asking people with the ability to
manipulate the force to [apply for jobs via Dominic Cummings' email
address](https://dominiccummings.com/2020/01/02/two-hands-are-a-lot-were-hiring-data-scientists-project-managers-policy-experts-assorted-weirdos/).
To gain genuine influence over the lives of others. I will save you the
version where I have supplanted "data science" with "witchcraft" but trust me
that they do not read very differently. I'm undecided whether I think this is
a ruse which will see the dawning of another Witchfinder General, but for data
scientists.


As time passes I don't expect my comparison between data science and the occult
to diminish. And I'm sort of okay with that.


---

If you are interested in learning more about the history of magic, witchcraft
and the occult then I recommend Christopher Dell's [illustrated
history](https://smile.amazon.co.uk/Occult-Witchcraft-Magic-Illustrated-History/dp/0500518882/ref=sr_1_1?crid=YONO9BV1RCSA&keywords=christopher+dell+the+occult+witchcraft+and+magic&qid=1578058096&sprefix=christopher+dell+%2Caps%2C292&sr=8-1).
Sadly, you have missed the magic exhibition at the Wellcome Collection in
London which was excellent, but you can still [read about
it](https://wellcomecollection.org/exhibitions/W_vuwBQAACoA_SY2). I would also
very much recommend Hannah Fry's [Hello
World](https://www.amazon.com/Hello-World-Being-Human-Algorithms/dp/039363499X)
to scratch that ethical machine learning itch, if you have one.
